---
title: "I Am the Reactor Operator"
description: "A story about being a Navy Nuke"
image: "social-media"
date: 2020-08-25T22:58:23-04:00
draft: false
---

What follows is the personal statement that I submitted to Columbia and NYU as
part of my college applications. I was always going to end up talking about the
Navy, submarines, and the nuclear pipeline. It was my life for the past six
years, there was no avoiding it. I needed to pick a single experience that
could relate to all of that and also myself as an individual, inside
six-hundred fifty words. Ultimately the essay needed to highlight why I was a
good choice to admit to these prestigious institutions, not educate the reader
about submarines.

{{< img src="ship" style="width: 35%; float: right;" />}}

The result is not a factually accurate account of naval propulsion reactors,
submarines, Chief Holman, or for that matter myself. If you know anything about
these things or these people please forgive some poetic license, I really
needed to get into college. If you ever stood on a watch team with me as your
Reactor Operator, I apologize twice over.

{{<fleuron>}}

*Some students have a background, identity, interest, or talent so meaningful
they believe their application would be incomplete without it. If this sounds
like you, please share your story.*

“I am the Reactor Operator”

These are the first words out of my mouth as I take station in front of the
Reactor Plant Control Panel. The journey here has been a long one, starting at
a Navy recruiting station on Long Island with a plane ticket to Chicago for
basic training. Then came two years in South Carolina, crash courses in
electronics, physics, mechanical principles and thermohydraulics. This
knowledge was refined with 12-hour shifts on Cold War era submarines, kept
alive by the Navy as a proving ground for trainees.

The last year has been spent working and learning on a very different platform,
the most powerful submarine in the fleet. The Navy only built three
Seawolf-class subs before Congress caught on to their three-billion dollar
price tag and today one of their massive propulsion reactors belongs to me. I
revel in my success for less than an hour before it all starts to come apart.

The audible alarm is underwhelming, like a gnat that has found its way into
your ear, but I don’t need it to know something is wrong. Every meter and
indication is screaming the same thing, my reactor has been shutdown rapidly
and unceremoniously. This is called a scram, and it means the crew have decided
to take their newly minted Reactor Operator for a test drive. The Reactor
Control Division Chief enters the control room and takes station behind me. He
is here to judge my performance, it’s now my job to bring my reactor back to
life.

{{< img src="submarine" imgstyle="border-radius:2em;" />}}

The process feels automatic as muscle memory and instinct take over,
continually cross-checked with evidence from my indications. Three years ago I
wouldn’t have been able to succeed here, in some ways the teenager from Long
Island is gone. In his place is someone with confidence and discipline,
expected from military training, but also something more. The man standing
before the Reactor Plant Control Panel takes ownership of his work,
responsibility for his decisions, and has the integrity to accept the
consequences of his actions. Ownership, responsibility, and integrity are the
roots of trust and they are why I have been given control of my reactor.

Trying not to betray my excitement I announce, “The reactor is critical.” I’ve
stoked the embers back into a small flame, but there’s no time to relax. Three
bells ring on the panel next to me, where the Throttleman controls the main
engines. They’re announcing that the Captain has ordered maximum power to the
engines. This is only done in cases of emergency, avoiding collisions — or an
enemy torpedo. Throttleman’s eyes are locked on me, imprudent action here can
destabilize conditions in my reactor, I have the option of ordering a cautious
approach.

I give the order, “Answer one-hundred percent power,” and the race is on.

{{< img src="squid" style="width: 40%; float: right; box-shadow: 0 0 0 0.29em #303030; border: 0.05em solid FloralWhite; margin: 1rem 0.34rem;" />}}

Throttleman wings open his throttles and the main engines gain hundreds of RPM.
I slam my coolant pumps into their fastest speeds and lock my controls to draw
out control rods. The engines are pulling heat out of my core faster than I can
restore it, but I have an ace up my sleeve. Naval reactors can exceed their
power limits for short periods of time. These transient limits are rarely
invoked, but I’m confident in my abilities and training. I push towards the
summit of my reactor’s capabilities and carve my name at the top.

Another bell rings; Captain is requesting a slower speed. Throttleman shuts his
throttles and I pull my reactor back from the brink. Core conditions stabilize
for the first time since the alarm. The Reactor Control Division Chief pulls a
small smile and leaves with only a single word, “Good.” I have passed my final
test.

Ownership, responsibility, and integrity are just words on a page until
realized through action. A submariner untested by hardship can only call
himself a trainee.

I am the Reactor Operator.

{{<fleuron>}}

I was admitted to NYU Tandon, and I'm forever grateful to the people who got me
there.
